live coverage of a hearing focusing on
entitlement reform the bipartisan
Commission on entitlements and tax
reform is meeting on Capitol Hill to
discuss the issues live coverage of this
hearing begins at ten a.m. eastern time
seven Pacific on c-span and tomorrow on
our companion networks you spend to live
coverage of a news conference releasing
an opinion poll on Congress and the
president the Terrans group releases
this poll tomorrow morning at ten a.m.
eastern time live coverage can be seen
on our companion network c-span 2 next a
news conference releasing an article
about us Cuba negotiations written by
former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger in the 1970s Peter core block
from the National Security Archive and
James blight of the center for foreign
policy development author the article
this program runs just under an hour
I me today my name is Rea Hederman with
the new york review of books and I'm
here on behalf of Bob Silver's editor of
the of the review and I would just like
to introduce Peter corn blue who has
done this piece for us on on Cuba and to
and to thank the National Security
Archive for all of the help that they've
given us and past pieces they
contributed a terrific amount of
information to us for a piece that Ted
Draper did on Iran Contra they also
provide information on the Cuban Missile
Crisis and now they've done this again
on Cuba and for that we're grateful and
I think the work that the archive is
doing is something that everyone in
journalism is should be most grateful
for and with that I'll turn this over to
Peter and let him introduce everyone
welcome all of you thank you for coming
I know that a number of you had to tear
yourself away from the State Department
noon briefing to be here today and I
hope that you'll find it more
interesting hopefully more newsworthy
than if you had stayed down at Foggy
Bottom I also want to thank the New York
Review for publishing this piece and in
fact for for doing a pre-release of it
that you have in your packets there a
writer and even historian couldn't ask
for a better popular outlet with the
detail and sophistication in credibility
that the review has brought to this to
this story we worked with The New Yorker
view on stories that we worked with many
of you on before iran-contra we worked
with them on a Cuban Missile Crisis
story that Arthur Schlesinger did couple
years ago and was out of our work on the
Cuban Missile Crisis that the project on
what we call the kids enjoyed a day
tante with Cuba grew the archive
collaborated with James blight of Brown
University is Watson Institute for
International Studies he was leading the
project we worked with a number of
scholars in the field small handful
including Professor Philip Brenner who
is here today to unearth the hidden
history of us efforts to arrive at a
date aunt and opening actual full
normalization of relations with Cuba in
the mid-1970s we also worked with a
number of the policy makers and they are
the ones that have made it possible
really for us to publish this article
and unearth the history in such detail
particularly former assistant secretary
for an American affairs William Rogers
he was a pivotal player in the day tante
initiative at the time and certainly was
a pivotal player in helping to get this
history out into the public domain at a
very appropriate time I think you'll all
agree before I open this up for
questions and introduce the other
participants of the press conference let
me just give you a short synopsis of
this history
in June of 1975 Secretary of State
Kissinger told his two deputies Lawrence
Eagle burger and William Rogers that
they should quote deal straight with
Castro behave chivalrously do it like a
big guy not like a shyster let him know
we are moving in a new direction we want
to synchronize unquote this was almost a
year into the Kissinger initiative on a
date on twiter which started when the
Secretary of State sent a note a
handwritten note with Frank mankiewicz
and Kirby Jones and saw Landau was also
here in June of 1974 those three
journalists at the time had obtained
special permission from the Cuban
government to interview Castro on tape
and prior to leaving for that interview
mankiewicz approached Kissinger and
asked him if he would like to send along
any type of message and Kissinger did so
what were his motivations first of all
what did the message say the message
said roughly we have things to talk
about and we should do it quietly using
intermediaries and emissaries and that
was the start of an 18-month process of
negotiations between the United States
and Cuba what were Kissinger's
motivations there were several according
to him he wanted to temper Q of his
meddling in Latin America he felt that
there could be an opening with Cuba not
as dramatic as one with China but
certainly on the same way and most
importantly the documents show he wanted
to get Cuba off the domestic and
interamerican agenda where it was fast
becoming a major political headache in
the mid-1970s they were growing voices
in Congress calling for an end to the US
trade embargo OAS countries were moving
unilaterally to to break away from the
US policy of isolating Cuba
diplomatically and reestablishing ties
and the OAS was going to over the dead
body of the United States if necessary
lift the multilateral trade embargo
against Cuba in 1975
so for this reason these reasons the
initiative went forward and over the
next 17 months there were at least half
a dozen secret meetings they took place
in cafeterias and national airport and
laguardia airport they took place at the
Pierre hotel in midtown Manhattan there
was even one meeting in the private home
of Kissinger's deputy Lawrence eco
burger at the same time our messager
messengers here our couriers frank
mankiewicz kirby jones and others
brought messages back and forth between
Kissinger's office and Castro's office
Pierre Salinger who's also here today
sat in on a meeting and mid nineteen
seventy five where Scott Reston the New
York Times columnist apparently also
brought a message from Kissinger for
Castro this was a very closely held
initiative in fact only three people and
the entire US government knew the
details of it Henry Kissinger Lawrence
Eagle burger and William Rogers
apparently Richard Nixon under whose
flagging administration the initiative
actually began did not know the full
details and Ford was apparently never
never fully briefed either it's
important to note as you read about
these negotiations that there were no
preconditions attached by henry
kissinger in these talks unlike his
predecessors he did not attach the
precondition that cuba sever all
military ties with the Soviet Union
before the United States and Cuba could
sit down to a dialogue and unlike his
successors including this administration
he did not demand the Cuba democratize
before the United States and Cuba sat
down to talk now the talks eventually
failed when you talk to the Cubans about
why they failed after 18 months of
efforts the Cubans say they failed
because of the 1976 presidential
campaign in which Ronald Reagan from the
right was challenging Gerald Ford on the
issue of day tante in general and on the
issue of an opening to Cuba in specific
Reagan was not privy to
details of what was really going on but
there certainly wasn't talking in the
paper about a different us approach to
to Cuba and the Florida primary much as
it's going to be in 1996 was at stake in
1976 and that's what the Cubans believed
was the reason for the talks breaking
down when you talk to the American
policymakers they believe that the talks
broke down because Cubans weren't
serious about normalizing relations Cuba
sent something on the order of 30,000
troops into Angola in light in late 1975
in response to escalating us covert
intervention through the CIA that
Kissinger and Ford had authorized this
became public and for the Americans it
was a signal along with the Cuban stance
on puerto rican independence that the
cubans really weren't serious about
about these talks one could say they
failed and leave it at that but in fact
when you look at the history the talks
succeeded in in several areas that I
think are very much worth noting one is
that the multilateral embargo was lifted
the United States did not oppose it at
the OAS and in fact thereafter as you'll
see in your press packets as part of a
gesture towards Cuba the Ford
administration lifted third-country
sanctions on trading with Cuba that
meant that US corporations based and
subsidiaries in other countries could
trade with Cuba without there being any
penalty under the embargo and that was a
major opening of the embargo if you will
at the time Cuba in response released a
number of political prisoners including
American prisoners and most importantly
particularly for the discussion today
over US policy the Cuban and American
negotiators at the time negotiated the
early opening small opening to be sure
but still an opening of the door for
Cuban American families in this country
to visit the island to visit their
relatives those are the negotiations did
come to fruition those led to a broader
opening of the door under the Carter
Administration and in fact is that door
that the Clinton administration is now
closed
severely restricting the charter flights
out of Miami to to Cuba I want to close
with a couple questions what are the
implications of this history for today
what might the Clinton administration
learn from a review of this history I
think the key question which of course
everybody is talking about is is a
broader diplomatic dialogue with Castro
possible on issues that beyond the the
issue of the restricted issue of
immigration and this history shows us
that indeed a dialogue on a full range
of bilateral issues is possible the
circumstances under which these
negotiations broke down the mid-1970s
are vastly changed today and Cuba is in
a different position visa vie its
economy these via its political position
in the world than it was in the mid
1970s the United States is obviously in
a different position to with the Cold
War over the second issue I think that's
relevant for today is the issue of
national interest in talks with Cuba and
this history clearly shows that Henry
Kissinger the master of real politics
saw that the United States had national
interest in not only talking to Cuba but
actually fully normalizing relations
with Cuba and that national interest if
anything is more relevant today than it
was at the time having said that what
I'd like to do is make sure you know who
everybody at the table is and open it up
for questions probably more to them than
to me we have Frank mankiewicz here he
was the almost the facilitator and in
some ways the instigator of this of this
initiative set up the first major
meeting that took place at LaGuardia
between Larry Eagle burger and the Cuban
emissaries and mr. mankiewicz attended
it also at that time he was had been a
former press secretary to Robert Kennedy
former Peace Corps official and was
acting in a capacity as a journalist in
the mid 1970s and is now a senior
official at hill and knowlton curvy
Jones is here also he also was there the
beginning of this initial
and became a courier himself later on in
the initiative all the way at the end of
the table is documentary filmmaker
senior fellow at the Institute for
Policy Studies saw Landau who also
accompanied mankiewicz and Jones on this
trip and was there when the message was
handed to to castro pierre salinger who
I don't think it needs any introduction
is here he can talk about the Kennedy
era and the issue of a dialogue with
with Castro as well as the meeting that
he said in on with Castro and Scott
Reston Professor Philip Brenner is here
he is part of the team of researchers
that has been working on uncovering the
secret history for the last couple of
years with that will open it up to you
and to them
you can simply identify yourself with
questions identify who you want to ask
the question too I think even though be
easier if we just took the questions at
the table all the microphones are up
here for c-span so people answering the
question will unfortunately to get up
and come to the podium and and will
answer the questions there are no
immediate questions I'd like to start
with frank who has a number of important
both anecdotes and is really the most
unique individual in that he was the
only person to meet directly with kiss
and ran with Castro about this
initiative well you take the podium
Liam we began this actually some months
before Kirby and and Saul and I had in
mind to make a documentary of an
interval long interview with the with
Castro which in fact we ultimately did
but what some 13 or 14 hours on tape
where I guess was filmed then it's all
right and but it took a long time as it
does now to get a visa to to go to Cuba
Castro had not had not been on American
television in nearly ten years at that
time and and we thought it would be a
useful piece of work and maybe even make
us a few dollars as it turned out it
became almost the most expensive home
movie ever ever made but that's that's a
different story it has to do with
television networks but before we went
to Cuba I went to see the Secretary of
State I had spent some time with him
before I had known him for a few years
seven or eight years I guess and had
even functioned from time to time as an
unofficial adviser to him on
latin-american matters Henry Kissinger I
think had a broad mind and wanted to
hear what a lot of people had to say I'm
not sure he ever took any of my advice
but from time to time we would meet
fairly openly and I would tell him what
I thought at least people who agreed
with me about American policy thought
should be done in Latin America and he
would nod and I had the feeling but at
least he knew that although he rarely as
I say took our advice but when it came
time to go to Cuba and mind you this is
in July of 1974 early July or late June
late June but in any event in the last
days of but seemed clearly to be the
last days of the Nixon presidency at
least it did to me and I went to see I
went to see the Secretary to say that i
was going to cuba expected to be there a
while and that I expected to spend some
time with Fidel Castro and did he have a
message he wanted to send of any kind
and he thought for a while and he said
yes yes I think I do and my recollection
is he sent me away for a couple of days
and then just before we left I went back
and he gave me a sealed message and
asked me to deliver it to to Prime
Minister Castro so we went to Cuba I
kept the message for some time because
we didn't see Castro for a week or so
and finally we did and when we did I
told him I had this message and it was
from Kissinger and so we sat in one of
Castro's private studies at the at the
Palacio and and he read it it was in
handwriting obviously Kissinger's
handwriting or at least some some
Germans handwriting and and he said at
the fanny Reddit and said that it was a
very significant document told us Kirby
and and me what what he thought what it
contained he paraphrased it obviously I
don't think he read it verbatim but it
was quite clear quite clear what the
Kissinger was saying he wanted to get a
discussion going he wanted to go move
toward easier relations full relations
ultimately but that it would be done
step by step through emissaries and the
implication of course was that the
emissaries would certainly not be out in
the open so we left it at that Castro
thought and thought and asked us for
advice as to whether he should send a
message back and I said yes I certainly
thought he should and so when we left he
gave he gave me a message to take back
to Kissinger along with a box of his
very special cohiba
cigars for the Secretary of State and he
also gave me two of those boxes for
myself so now the problem how to get
these three huge boxes through customs
and I decided it would be folly to try
to hide them in the in my suitcase
because I would be smuggling so I put
him under my arm and walk through
customs and sure enough a customs
inspector said what are those I said oh
those are cigars I said they're they're
from Fidel Castro he gave them to me
this morning they're from Henry
Kissinger would you like to seize them i
said to him and he said no said he
thought that was the best story he had
ever heard bringing Cuban cigars into
the country so we brought him in and I
gave one box down and kept two for
myself and it started a bit of a cigar
habit but we then Kissinger then agreed
i guess or decided within the within the
department of all I always had the
feeling it was only he and Larry Eagle
burger at that time I think was a
special assistant not a deputy or an
undersecretary but obviously a man on
whom Kissinger relied very highly and
eventually Eagle burger and I set up an
arrangement where the Cubans would
nominate someone and I called friend and
the Cuban embassy at the UN and he
relayed that and then came back and told
me who the emissary would be and he had
a code name but I can't remember what it
was Eagle burgers code name was
Henderson and he and I have a different
recollection on that we both agree that
it was Henderson he claims he doesn't
know why it was Anderson I claimed it
was because he told me he was born in
Henderson Kentucky seems to me an easy
fact to verify he said he doesn't recall
that but in any event he was Henderson
and I forget oh it was it was um Ramon
Sanchez Parodi and his code name was
Vieira
so every once in a while I would get a
call at mr. Anderson would like to talk
to mr. Vieira mr. Vieira would like to
talk to mr. Henderson and so I'd call
the other one and and either they would
speak on the phone or we would go
somewhere in me on a couple of occasions
we went up to LaGuardia Airport Eagle
burger and I and met once in a very
squalid sort of cocktail lounge at the
airport and once in the cafeteria with a
couple of members of the Cuban
delegation from the from the United
Nations and at the early meeting it was
it was the Cubans asked for and then
within a very short space of time got an
extension of the travel permission for
Cuban diplomats in New York extended the
miles they could go so that they could
come to Washington and then the
exchanges began which are all documented
in your in your press kit on easier
travel between the mainland and Cuba
relatives exchange and the rest of it
and it progressed for quite a while but
that's how it began Henry Kissinger I
think was quite convinced at the time
that there was going to be a new
president very soon George get out of AP
I was in Cuba in the fall of 74 when
pelham Javits went down and this was
after Castro and read the lure listenger
memo and so forth and even by Castro
standards the speech he gave that night
I believe was September 28th was one of
the most stridently anti-american
speeches of his career and this suggests
a lack of interest on on Castro's part
in better relations with the United
States and wonder whether you have any
thoughts as to whether Cuba entered
these talks with a seriousness of
purpose about improving relations with
the United States
well I I think it's for pretty much
reflected in these documents that they
did have such an attention I certainly
thought so I think I think Castro has
always wanted a better relationship with
the United States I think he wanted it
then I think he wants it now I think he
has always believed that the embargo was
essentially an irrational Act and that
certainly Cubans are much more Pro
American than almost any other citizens
of any other country in Latin America
and I think he probably took that into
account to know I think he I think there
was a very much of a desire on the Cuban
side to reach step-by-step agreements I
think they were I think they were
certainly not willing for a lot of
reasons including pride to give in on
significant elements of an agreement
that the United States wanted I think
neither side was free of the sin of
pride but I I think at the time of that
visit with Senator Javits and Senator
palette you speak about we were there
than to we were filming a an additional
piece of the documentary to accommodate
the fact that Nixon was president when
we began shooting and the Ford would be
president when we went on the air dan
Rather came down with us because CBS had
had bought the footage described the
visit that Castro mate to our hotel room
about the two senators you recall that
well he you remember the Javits had gone
i believe it's at least it would be my
analysis the Javits had gone down there
in the first place because he was being
crowded from the left in the Senate race
by Ramsey Clark and wanted to
reestablish his liberal credentials such
as they were so he was there and Senate
pal who was ranking I guess on Foreign
Relations was there for what purpose I
wasn't sure acceptable stir javits in
the in the New York Senate race but we
had a problem because we had persuaded
CBS 2 by our film and buy us out in
effect and finally let us break even on
this expensive home movie provided
Castro gave no interviews before this
program went on the air which was going
to be an October in that visit was
September and we were very much afraid
that one of you correspondence would
trap him into an interview thus
destroying us and I was surprised about
20 minutes before you were all supposed
to meet javits and pail and Castro and
the three of them were going to have a
meeting and I couldn't even go I
couldn't even bear to go watch because I
was afraid of what would happened and I
was in my hotel room through the air and
there's a knock on the door and there is
the prime minister and he came in he
said I want to talk to you a moment and
I said well fine sony put on my shirt
and and he said I want some advice
monkey wheats he said because I have
never been involved in a American Senate
race before and I want to know what to
say and I said well I not going to
advise you on what to say on the merits
I said but I will tell you that that if
you say anything on camera we will be
ruined
and I explained why and he nodded and
and then he left to go over to the
meeting he left his cap in my room which
I always thought would have been one of
the great souvenirs of all time but he
came back to get it and and then went to
the meeting and I understand that there
at the meeting he was pressed not by you
by one of your colleagues as to why he
was not giving an interview and he said
it was because he had given us an
exclusive and turned with his cigar and
walked in with Senator Javits and
Senator pelin did not talk to the
American media I think that's what why
but i think he his feeling was then but
he wanted to persevere and depress this
day tante that was under way I strongly
believe that he did give a nanny
American speech but then that was pretty
much his standard stump speech all you
want to one detail Frank that might be
significant he said he didn't want to
say anything to offend either of the
Senators and he said I wanted very
carefully understood that I don't want
to say anything anti-american to them to
offend them and on that basis he said
good he asked you why he said he
understood why Javits was there but
couldn't figure out why senator Pell had
come and he was the beard I think yeah
but in answer to your question George he
was very uh he made it painstakingly
clear he didn't want to say anything
offensive to these two senators against
the United States so I think you should
might be a separate rhetoric from actual
diplomacy I think I think he he felt
that the tone of the speech you talked
about would be understood as routine
that was my thought at the time anyway I
don't think it was anything new about it
you want one thing of yogurt
when one except there was it 11 / of
1974 about September 2893 2028 speech
with the 28th was the anniversary of the
founding of the committee's for the
defense of the revolution Jordan that
that was an annual speech in the 28th
every year he made he made that speech
and I but I want to get to the point
your point George of why would he make
that speech at a time when the second
message was being delivered during that
visit because that is a theme which
occurs over and over again and occurs in
these documents of Rogers and kissing
her unsure unclear why would Cuba go
into Angola why would they take this
position on Puerto Rico when they're in
the midst of these negotiations for the
US and if they do that they're for
they're not serious it's a total miss
reading of the situation then and now
and there's an assumption that Fidel
Castro will base what he does solely on
what he is receiving or not receiving
from the United States and keep in mind
the climate in 1975 in 74 for 14 years
there had not been any negotiations or
any substantial contact at all between
the United States and Cuba you had a
foreign ministry in Cuba was never dealt
with US State Department in any
substantive way you had a US State
Department who has never had never dealt
with Fidel Castro in a substantive way
all of a sudden out of the blue comes
his kissing her note an unsigned
handwritten note carried by two
journalists advocating can't we talk
they didn't know what to make of this it
was great confusion as to what did this
mean were we a setup was our whole
interview a screen for this message what
was going on here they had no basis upon
which no context in which to put this so
when you come to a speech and here is
this only the second message he's got a
domestic constituency to deal with and
his public rhetoric cannot all
we's be taken then or now as an
indication of what the private purposes
are and if you look through these
document the concern about angola the
fact the matter is well prior to 75 Cuba
had troops in Angola advising the mpla
the US for all those years did not
mention anything about those Cuban
troops in Angola why should Fidel Castro
think that his troops in Angola they've
been there for many years not mentioned
by the United States should all of a
sudden become an issue Puerto Rico we
hadn't mentioned there had been no
outcry in the part of the United States
about Cubans position with regard to
Puerto Rico we assume it was assumed by
our government that given these secret
negotiations of course castor wouldn't
do anything in Angola Castro was sitting
there saying they haven't talked to us
about on goal or Puerto Rico in 15 years
we have this nice little thing going
with these secret negotiations the US
government is sending covert 8 into
Angola four months prior I've had my
troops there they know i have my troops
they don't say anything all of a sudden
it becomes an issue so i think there was
a mistake made then in terms of they
aren't serious because they wouldn't
have gone in angola without
understanding the historical connection
but at that point P in Cuba and and go
the final point is on these exchange of
messages what was learned there is that
both sides could trust the other if it's
done out of the glare of the limelight
and without posturing however small the
commitments were on either side both
were met absolutely on schedule and
absolutely as they said each side would
meet them and I think what happened
there was a trust that you can negotiate
with this guy he isn't going to use the
secret diplomacy for internal or
external political reasons he is a man
who knows how to deal in diplomatic
channels and there was that body of
comfortableness which came up which then
could form the basis unfortunately in
last very long form the basis of an
ongoing ongoing relationship I just want
to add I think what both sides learned
was that these things could be carried
on not through diplomatic channels but
outside of diplomatic channels with no
publicity of any kind I don't think
except for Saul and Kirby and myself and
I don't know about Henry Kissinger and
Larry Eagle burger but I don't know
until a year or so ago if anybody else
knew about it at all and and I think
that's those negotiations established i
think for cuba and i would hope for the
department of state that this kind of
thing can go on privately and most
important of all with no publicity i
would like to think that negotiations of
that kind and messages of that kind
they're probably being exchanged now at
least i would hope so talking to
journalists and it occurs to me how cool
was it are you acting as a journalist to
go into the secretary and ask for him to
provide you with a personal note and to
be involved in the issue over that
period of time I thought highly ethical
never crossed my mind there would be any
conflict I so everyone's gonna report on
it that's what you were doing but you
became a part of the part of the story
only in the last six months not for 15
years I figure that's good enough
any other questions for frank carillo
there at the podium we had one piece to
Frank's anecdote in terms when the
message was that this his replied it to
the first message it was standing at his
Jeep in the doorway of the Hotel Riviera
and I think Frank said have you got a
reply to the message and he reached in
and told her I said oh yeah I do and
here it is and he said he said the first
message from dr. Kissinger was an
unsigned handwritten note this also is
an unsigned handwritten note but it was
written by my foreign minister Raul rowa
so there's no confusion we just want to
keep things on a protocol equal basis
foreign minister to foreign minister
jerec now
just say a few words I was not involved
in back-channel negotiations but I got
into a very interesting situation of my
own in August of 1975 about six weeks
before that I had been contacted by an
old friend of mine who happened to be
the press secretary the President of
Mexico mr. Fausto Zapata and I was told
that the president New Mexico was going
to make a three-month tour around the
world he was coming near the end of his
term and he liked me to join him as part
of the delegation and travel around the
world well at the time I was working for
a French weekly magazine news magazine
l'express I didn't see any way that I
could take three months off and traveled
around the world with mr. etcheverry but
I said to Fausto will give me a list of
countries that you're going to and
suddenly he says Cuba and having lived
through the Cuban Missile Crisis having
lived through the Bay of Pigs and having
had no Kennedy staff person ever meet
Fidel Castro I thought well this is a
great opportunity because I'm sure the
president etcheverry will set up a
meeting for me with Fidel Castro and
that was something that I was interested
in doing so I met President etcheverry
in Trinidad and became part of the
delegation to fly to Cuba there's an
interesting little side story I went to
dinner with the president and his
delegation team they were all wearing
these very special Mexican shirts I was
not and present so might you have to
have one of those shirts and he actually
sent a jet all the way to Mexico City to
pick up a shirt for me so that I could
be a real part of the delegation anyway
he did set up a meeting for me with
Fidel Castro on the twenty first of
August 1975 I was joined at that meeting
by an important American journalist
James Reston known better as Scotty
rested and he was also part of mr.
etcheverry delegation to Cuba and he
must have had some ideas of why he
wanted to go to Cuba to as you will
learn we spent a considerable amount of
time with mr. Castro and I'm looking at
notes
now in an article that I wrote right
after I saw Castro Pierre Salinger in
Cuba there's a picture of Fidel and I
guess that I lead it with one of the
most interesting quotes i ever heard
from a world leader Castro said the
United States is finished to accept me
because the CIA has not succeeded in
eliminating me I thought that was kind
of interesting but in the discussions he
talked about a number of things and it
became clear in those discussions and in
fact I reported here that there were
already back channel talks going on
between the United States and Cuba but
at a certain point in our meeting
suddenly mr. Reston pointed to mr.
Castro and said excuse me mr. president
would you mind if I change my hat and
Castro says well what kind of a hat
would you like to put on he said I'd
like to put on a diplomatic hat I have a
message for you from Henry Kissinger we
would like now to go to a higher level
and have talks with you on normalizing
relations between the United States and
Cuba Castro said I'm all in favor of
that but I will not go into any talks
until you drop the embargo and rest and
said well that's exactly what Kissinger
told me that you would say what about if
we had some pre talks organize some pre
talks and so they discussed that for
about 15-20 minutes came to an accord
that pre talks would begin in Madrid
between the United States and Cuban
ambassadors working up to the level
where top American officials would
actually meet directly with Fidel Castro
in going forward on these talks now as
you've heard of course several things
happened in the six to eight weeks after
that because I walked out of there
rather optimistic that the possibility
of us going forward into a more normal
relationship with Cuba was going to
happen but
of course the 30,000 troops in Angola
and the conference a very important
international conference held in Nevada
calling for Puerto Rico independence
from the united states both of these
things had some effect on the American
government at the same time it was
interesting talking to castro because
i'm george your question about his
attitude and i must say that in talking
to him he was very much in favor of
dialogue and so whatever he said in that
speech was not what he was saying
privately when he was wanting to
negotiate with the United States he said
that the relations between Cuba and the
United States should become normal he
said that for a year the american
government had been sending messages to
hit to castro that he had responded to
those messages and that he was seeing
things going in a good way he agreed in
the discussion of for example
extraditing air pirates who he also two
weeks later gave back to an american air
company the southern airways two billion
dollars for a plane that had been turned
over the only thing he said was he
refused to negotiate before refused to
have the final negotiation for the
lifting of the embargo and he said this
is his exact quote I will not discuss as
long as a knife is pointed in my heart
and that's when he was talking about the
embargo so I walked away this is the
only time that I ever met Fidel Castro
the only time that I learned that these
things were going on but obviously it
was a very interesting decision of mine
to go to him and see Fidel Castro at
that time obviously we had long
discussions
about the Kennedy administration and
particularly about the very important
point that I have made and I'm sure some
of you have read in my op-ed piece in
The Washington Post the meeting that
John Kennedy had with John Danielle who
at that time was the editor of l'express
the magazine for which I later went to
work for he's now the editor of another
magazine called the new Bell observator
and in their discussions and there I
want to tell you that I did make a
little mistake in that op-ed page I said
that he had written a note that was not
true he had told him everything voice to
voice and Danielle had taken the notes
but Castro that's another interesting
thing because he never forgot that he
says that he was he had learned from you
John Danielle the desire of Kennedy to
start negotiations and I was desolated
this is his quote I was desolated when
Kennedy was assassinated with him the
relations between the United States and
Cuba or eeyore would certainly have been
reestablished much much earlier he sent
me some words by an intermediary a
French journalist John Danielle and I
was with John Danielle when we learned
that John Kennedy been assassinated in
Dallas why won't invite questions at any
point but dr. Brenner would like to make
a few comments as well
I just went on to score one of the
important things that peter kuan glue
said in respect to what's going on today
the question that I've been asked by
several of your colleagues is what is
the significance of the seeming
stalemate in the negotiations between
Cuban the United States today and while
both Ricardo alcone and mr. Johnson from
the State Department have described this
as modest pessimism I think that the
reality is that we should look at these
this stalemate in a very optimistic way
for one thing we learn from these
documents that earlier negotiations with
Cuba took about a year and in in the
first instance they were frustrated it's
important to recognize though that they
weren't ultimately frustrated that the
negotiations continued in 1976 at a very
low level but they continued and they
led ultimately in 1977 when President
Carter took office to the opening of
interest sections diplomatic missions
and even through the worst of times of
the Reagan administration and even today
there's been a sense that those interest
sections have served United States
interest as a way of providing
information to the United States
first-hand information and so there was
a success there was a lowering of
tension we had some small agreements we
had a fishing agreement with Cuba that
saw the border problem essentially for
the two countries and in that respect we
can look to what US interests are and we
have very discreet interest in this case
and we are moving towards those
interests in the case of these
negotiations in one week we have moved a
significant distance that's room for
optimism I don't think that Ricardo
elocon would have gone home if he didn't
have something to talk to Fidel Castro
about and come back with a new position
the expectation should be that there
will be breakthroughs and that this
crisis is likely to be defused that's
the lessons you can draw from this kind
of history
I just wanted to add a note to help
clarify some of the things that Frank
said good my memory in his are quite
similar on it I had subsequent
conversations with both Ramon Sanchez
parodi and another one of the Cuban
negotiators a man named Nestor Garcia
and both of them said the following that
they really didn't ever understand why
specifically the United States broke off
the talks Sanchez Parodi said they
raised the issue of Puerto Rico and he
said this didn't seem a very likely
subject because we had come out for
puerto rican independence year after
year and i didn't really make a lot of
difference whether we stood for Puerto
Rico in Puerto Rican independent so we
didn't it wasn't going to happen the
United States knew it wasn't going to
happen and Nestor then privately some
years later added you know the feeling I
got he says that Kissinger really didn't
think it was appropriate for small
countries like Cuba to play roles in
world history or to be anywhere near the
center of the world stage and that that
was the issue it was never raised to us
by the negotiators as such but it was a
more of a message that we got through
nuance and a variety of other forms of
communication that Cuba had no business
being anywhere near the center of the
world stage even if it was in the
affairs of Africa and I think that
that's an important thing to understand
into